== Garbage-collection

wart frees up unused memory using reference-counting
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reference_counting). Every Cell tracks the
number of incoming pointers to it using a field called nrefs.

wart must increment/decrement nrefs when saving a Cell inside another: in the
car or cdr, or inside a Table.

Tests thoroughly audit nrefs using checkState, in order to detect errors as
soon as possible.

eval takes pains to increment the nrefs of *exactly* one Cell across all
paths. Nested calls to eval decrement nrefs of the result unless they return
it. Structure any functions returning Cells the same way.

If you hack on wart's cc files and forget to decrement nrefs you have a memory
leak. If you forget to increment nrefs you have something worse: a prematurely
garbage-collected cell that may now be used for something else entirely. Old
pointers to it can no longer rely on what it contains; they may clobber or try
to interpret arbitrary data as a string or a Table. All bets are off. wart
tries to loudly detect this insidious class of error as immediately as
possible. Every time a Cell is freed it resets its pointers to NULL; when it's
reused its pointers are initialized to nil. If wart ever complains that it ran
across NULL, it means I or you forgot to decrement nrefs somewhere. All bets
are off.

Never assign to car or cdr or inside a table by hand. Use an existing
primitive: setCar, setCdr, set. They're thoroughly tested.

If you ever encounter NULL, debug=true is your friend. Use it judiciously.

== Generated _lists

To run its tests wart needs a list of tests to run. It constructs such a list
on the fly during compilation. Several other places use the same trick. The
set of files to compile is auto-generated, as is the list of compiled
primitives wart knows about. This means you can add new COMPILE_PRIM_FUNC
operators, or entirely new code in .cc files, and they'll be automatically
included next time you run wart.

== Strings

The wart interpreter pervasively uses wide characters
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wide_character) to enable unicode. All string,
char, stream and IO types are not what they may seem at first. char is
wchar_t, string is wstring, and so on. A few places that can't use wide
characters use type ascii.
